+++
title = "Writing a big code from scratch for GPUs"
date = "2026-06-02T10:51:00"
author = "Jorge"
#cover = "img/hello.jpg"
description = "How to build a GPU codebase"
+++


## Introduction 

Using GPUs is the hot thing at the moment. Well, it has been for a while now...but, nowadays it is basically
a requirement for a codebases to have GPU support or a good explanation on why they don't have it at all.

There are two avenues for a codebase to start using GPUs: 1) port the existing codebase to use GPUs, or 
2) rewrite the codebase from scratch 

Rewriting is probably the best approach, since it gives you complete control on how everything is going 
to be done and you can choose to rewrite at any speed possible and whichever paths are necessary. However, 
it is a monumental task to do if the codebase is large enough. In reality, even a 10k line codebase
is a big task - especially if the codebase lacks tests, a Continuous Integration (CI) environment, 
regression tests that catch performance and correctness of the physics. This is usually the 
case for most academic driven codebases, since most development is done by none software engineers.

Porting is the act of slowly enabling routines to the GPU by carefully dissecting them and using whichever
method you want to run them on the GPU. This becomes tricky quickly because the core idea of using a GPU
involves moving data from the host to the device (unless you have some of those fancy unified memory CPU-
GPUs, like a GH200 or an MI300A). This is painful because, traditionally, CPU codebases have been quite
careless with how memory is allocated and where it is used. Additionally, the way parallelism is set up
for CPU based codes is to minimize FLOPs, because they were expensvie - sometimes with GPUs those tricks
that made CPU codes fast can end up making GPU code slow! So sometimes you need to reformulate the 
algorithm or the code itself. This can be problematic because that means touching code that might have been 
there for ages and that one does not understand anymore. Additionally, this code could not be tested 
at all! 

Both approaches can be painful, rewriting from scratch means an _insane_ amount of work and means 
probably alienating a lot of existing developers that use the codebase. It stops progress right 
in its tracks by putting a moratorium on development or it creates a parallel codebase. It is 
usually a painful process, it might ruffle some feathers around the team. 

Porting can be quite painful for the people doing the job - especially if the code is still 
moving forward because it is very easy to introduce breaking changes that can work fine on the
CPU but completely destroy performance or correctness on the GPU. 

## My opinion 

After doing both and seeing how things work I have convinced myself that a rewrite is the 
best idea if you are chasing performance without compromise. What do I mean here? The only
things that matter are: the correct answer and getting there as fast as we can. We do not
care about CPU performance, we do not care or care little about portability (until we do), 
we care little about readability, etc. This can be very problematic, though hard code
to read is hard code to extend and maintain. Also, if you can only run on a single 
platform, what do you do if your HPC centre buys another hardware? Difficult things! 

This is why I believe on a pragmatic approach. Everything with moderation! So the idea 
is to do things as best as we can: good programming, maintainability, performance, 
readability, and of course, correctness! 

## My approach 

I am still burnt out of C++ so we shall still use Fortran for everything. 

### Memory handling 

Fortran is great that it has allocatable arrays, which are mostly memory safe. So the 
idea is that we have "handles" that carry a consistent state. This way the resources
are owned by a process or set of processes. A bit object oriented. This will also 
let us have reusable scratch spaces, for example if we need an array of whatever
size to do some work we shouldn't allocate it on the fly, we should try to only 
do it at the start, put it on the GPU and reuse as we go along. This makes it 
easy to then just work on existing memory in a speedy way. 


The idea here is that we have say a simulation:

```fortran 
program my_sim 


call initialize_system(system)

call evolve_system(system)

call finalize_system(system)

end program 
```

Sometimes, in traditional CPU codes people were/are quite liberal with memory 
allocations, especially in Fortran where allocatable arrays are ensured to be 
memory safe and be deallocated when they go out of scope. They get tricky 
once they are in derived types (objects). So it is always tempting to 
allocate on the fly scratch arrays to hold temporary values, etc. since allocating
memory on the CPU is kinda free. This is problematic on the GPU because
you don't only need to allocate memory you also need to transfer it. Most 
transfers are blocking, i.e. the GPU has to wait for the memory to be 
avalilable, otherwise it will operate on invalid memory! That is not good.

Transfer is also a bottleneck because the speed is dictated by the interconnect, 
usually the PCIe bus which is around a couple hundreds of GB/s. So we have to be 
smart about how we do memory. 

In reality, we _always_ need scratch arrays, that's why we can be smart about it and 
allocate them ahead of time. I.e. something like:

```fortran 

type :: gpu_buffer_type 
  real, allocatable :: a(:)
  integer, allocatable :: b(:)
  real, allocatable :: a_2d(:,:)
contains 
  procedure :: allocate_buffers 
  procedure :: free_buffers 
end type gpu_buffer_type

...

subroutine allocate_buffers(this, size_x, size_y)
  class(gpu_buffer_type), intent(inout) :: this 
  integer, intent(in) :: size_x, size_y

  allocate(a(size_x))
  allocate(b(size_x))
  allocate(a_2d(size_x, size_y))

  !initialize to 0.0, this can be done on the GPU but it kinda gets weird sometimes
  a = 0.0
  b = 0 
  a_2d = 0.0

  ! now we do the GPU, we will use OpenaCC 
  !$acc enter data copyin(this)
  !$acc enter data copyin(this%a, this%b, this%a_2d)

end subroutine allocate_buffers

```

The idea is that then inside other subroutines we can just pass in our `gpu_buffer_type` in 
case we need or want a scratch array we simply use one of the member variables. We depend 
on being able to reuse it. The other idea is that we do this at the start and reuse the pre
allocated arrays so that we can use them withotu needing to transfer anything to and from
the device. 

We have to be careful, though, because it can get very tepmting to allcoate a bunch of buffers
which will quickly lead to the device being full! 







### Data structures and containers 


